source: https://sites.google.com/site/aquinasstudybible/home/genesis/augustine-s-unfinished-commentary-on-genesis

LITERAL COMMENTARY ON GENESIS

(INCOMPLETE)

AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO

Retractations I, 18:

In composing, against the Manichaeans, two books on Genesis, in which I expounded the words of the divine Scripture in an allegorical sense, I did not dare to explain to the letter so great secrets of the things of nature, it is to say, in what way they could take the things that are said there in true historical sense; that is why I wanted to try now what my strength was in this laborious and difficult matter, but this attempt to re-expose the Sacred Scriptures in a literal sense failed under the weight of such an enormous burden. And even though I had not finished a book, I stopped working, because I saw that I could not stand it. When making the retraction of my tracts, it came to my hands this same as it was, incomplete; the one he had certainly not made public and who had determined to break it; since later I wrote twelve that they take by title: On the Genesis to letter. And although in them it appears rather that they ask many more things than they are, however they can not be compared to this one. Certainly, after having corrected it, I wanted to keep it, so that it would be, I believe, a non-useless index of my beginnings in the investigation and exposition of the divine word. I wanted your title to be incomplete Book of Genesis to the letter. I found it written up to the words "the Father is only Father, the Son is only Son, because, when the likeness of the Father is said, although it is revealed that there is no dissimilarity between the two, nevertheless the Father is not alone it has similarity ». Then (before adding to numbers 16 and 62) I repeated the words of the divine Scripture that again had to be considered and treated: And God said: Let us make man in our image and likeness. So far I had written this incomplete book. The two numbers that follow I thought it convenient to add them when making your review; However, not with this I completed it, but even with this addition I left it incomplete. If I had completed it, I would at least have written of all the works and words of God that pertain to the sixth day. It seemed superfluous to note in this book the things that displease me or defend those that, not being well understood by others, despise them.

I advise you to read the twelve books that I composed much later as a bishop, and for them to criticize them. This book begins: "On the secrets of the things of nature that we judge were made by the omnipotent Artificer, it is to be treated not by affirming, but by searching."

 

Chapter I

The Catholic faith is exposed in this chapter

1. On the secrets of natural things, which we judge to be made by God, omnipotent Artificer, must be treated not affirming, but seeking what is true; and mainly in the books that the divine Authority entrusts to us, in which the temerity of affirming an insecure and doubtful opinion, hardly avoids the sin of sacrilege; however, the uncertainty of finding such secrets should not exceed the terms of the Catholic faith. But as many heretics are accustomed to exposing the divine Scriptures, adapting them to their opinions, which are against the faith of Catholic doctrine, before presenting this book, the Catholic faith must be briefly proposed.

2. This is that God the Almighty Father made and ordained every creature through his Only Begotten Son, that is, through his wisdom and co-eternal and coeternal power with Him, in unity of the Holy Spirit also consubstantial and co-eternal with Him. The doctrine Catholic teaches us to believe that this Trinity is one God, and that He created and formed, as they are, all things that exist, in such a way that every creature, whether intellectual and corporal, or to put it more briefly according to the words of the divine Scripture, visible or invisible, was not formed of the nature of God, but made out of nothing, by God; and there is nothing in it that belongs to the Trinity, except that the Trinity created it and it was created; therefore, it is not lawful to say that the universal creature is consubstantial to God and coeternal with Him.

3. It also tells us the same faith that all things, made by God, are extremely good, that natural evils do not exist, but that everything that is called evil or sin or penalty of sin; that sin would not exist if we did not direct the evil consent of the free will, and from which we can freely abstain, to those things that justice forbids; that is to say, that sin is not in things, but in the misuse of them. Therefore, the use of things is legitimate when the soul remains in the law of the Lord and surrenders to the one God with perfect love, and administers all things delivered to her without levity and without sensuality, that is, according to the mandate of God; in this way the soul, without difficulty and without work, will govern with great ease and joy. The penalty, then, of sin, is that the soul is tormented by creatures, since they no longer serve him as he does not serve God either; before, when she obeyed God, all creatures obeyed her. Therefore, fire is not an evil, because it is a creature of God, although, nevertheless, it burns our weakness in virtue and punishment of sin. Also natural or proper sins are those who before necessarily helping us the mercy of God necessarily commit after having fallen into this misery by the sin of free will.

4. He also teaches us the faith that man was renewed through Our Lord Jesus Christ, when the ineffable and immutable wisdom of God deigned to take the whole man and be born of the Virgin Mary by virtue of the Holy Spirit and be crucified and buried. and to rise and rise to the heavens, what has already happened; and come to judge the living and the dead at the end of the world, and to raise the flesh of the dead, which is announced as a thing to come. He also confesses that the Holy Spirit is given to those who believe in Him, who was instituted by Him, our mother, the Church, who is called Catholic because it is spread throughout the world and is universally perfect and in no way surrenders. Finally, he teaches that he first remits and forgives sins to penitents, and then promises the kingdom of heaven and eternal life.

Chapter II

How to expose the law

5. According to this faith should be considered the things that can be sought and disputed in this book that begins In the beginning God made heaven and earth. In four different ways some law writers expose the law; their names can be stated in Greek and explained and defined in Latin, according to history, allegory, analogy and etiology. We explain things according to history, when the executed facts are narrated, whether they are divine or human; according to the allegory, when the facts and sayings are figuratively taken; they are exposed in analogical sense when the conformity between the passages of the Old and the New Testament is demonstrated; and according to the etiology when the causes are given or the reason for the facts and sayings is said.

Chapter III

6. Then on what was written: in the beginning God made heaven and earth, he may ask himself if it should be understood only according to the historical sense, or also if it means something figuratively; also in what way it agrees with the Gospel, and, finally, why this book begins like this. According to the historical sense it is asked what meaning it has in the beginning, namely: whether we should understand it as the beginning of time or the Principle, that is, the Wisdom of God, because also the Son of God called himself Principle when He was interrogated: Who are you? and he answered: the Principle that spoke to you1. There is, then, a Principle without a principle, and a Principle with another Principle. Principle without principle is only the Father and by this we believe that all things exist because of a single Principle; but the Son is in such a way Principle that by generation comes from the Father. The same first intellectual creature can also call it a principle, since it is the head of all those that God made. And because with all property the head is called the beginning, for this reason the Apostle did not say at that graduation that the woman was the head of some; but the man said it was the head of the woman. and the head of the male Christ, and the head of Christ the God, 2 and thus the creature is united to the Creator.

7. Was it said at the beginning because it was the first thing that was done? Or is it that the first heaven and earth could not be made among the creatures, if the angels and all the intellectual powers were made in the first place? Because it is necessary that we believe that the angels are creatures of God and that they were made by Him, because also the angels listed the prophet among the creatures of God in Psalm 148, when he said: He commanded and they were made. He commanded it and they were created3; But if the angels were created before everything else, it may be asked: were they created in time or before time or at the beginning of time? If they were created in time, time existed before the angels were created; and since time is also a creature, we see ourselves in the precision of admitting that before the angels something began to exist; and if we say that they were created at the beginning of time in such a way that at the same moment that time began to exist, we will say that what some claim is false is that time began when heaven and earth were made.

8. But if the angels were created before time, it must be investigated in what sense and why it was said in the following verses: and God said to make the luminaries in the firmament of heaven so that they illuminate the earth and divide the day and the night and signal the times, the days and the years; because, according to this, it may seem that then began the times when the sky and the luminaries of heaven began to move in their determined orbits. If this is true, in what way could the days be before time existed, if the time had its origin at the beginning of the luminaries, which is said to have been done on the fourth day? Or is it that this distribution of days, according to the custom of speaking of human weakness, was ordered according to the norm or requirement of narrating and insinuating with simplicity the sublime things to the humble, for which it happens that the same discourse The speaker can not exist if they do not occupy some words at the beginning, others the middle and others the end? Or perhaps it was said that the luminaries were created in these times that men measure by the movement of bodies with intervals of duration? But these times would not exist, if there were no movement of bodies, but they are well known by men. If we admit this we see ourselves in the precision of asking whether out of the movement of bodies there can be time in a movement of disembodied creature, such as the soul or the mind; it moves in his thoughts and by this movement in it one thing is first and another final; which can not be understood without a time interval. If we admit this kind of time, it can also be understood that time was made before heaven and earth existed, if angels were created before heaven and earth, since there already existed a creature that constituted time with incorporeal movements, and clearly it will be understood that with it time existed, as in the soul, which is accustomed to notice the bodily movements through the senses of the body; but perhaps this does not happen in the higher and very eminent creatures. Whatever may be of this, since it is a very occult thing and impenetrable to human conjectures, the only certain thing that must be maintained as of faith, although it exceeds the lights of our intelligence, is that every creature has a beginning, and that time is a creature and therefore consists of principle and is not coeternal to the Creator.

9. It can also be understood that perhaps the sky and the earth were named, comprising the universal creation; in such a way that this sky was called visible and ethereal sky, and that invisible creature of excelentísimo to put; and earth to the lower part of the world with all the animals that inhabit it. Or was it called heaven to every sublime and invisible creature, and earth to all the visible, in such a way that what was said could be understood: in the beginning God made heaven and earth by the universal creation? Perhaps properly and in comparison with the invisible creature is called earth to all the visible, and sky to the invisible, understanding the soul in the visible even though she is invisible, since by losing herself in the love of visible things and being enriched with the possession of them, it was called earth as it is written: why are you proud, earth and ashes?

10. It may be asked if by chance heaven and earth were called all things already distinct and ordered, or the name of heaven and earth was given principally to that report which is the subject of all things, which was formed, commanded by God ineffably, in these natures that we see formed and beautiful; for although we read what is written: that you made the world of material matter5, however, we can not say that the same matter, in whatever form and form it exists, was not made by Him, from the moment we believe and confess that He comes from everything; and this is the world called this separation and ordering of each of the things formed and different, and is called heaven and earth to the same matter report, as if it said that it was the seed of heaven and earth; heaven and earth that being as mixed and disordered were fit to receive the forms from the Creator, God. It is enough with what we have investigated so far on what is written: in the beginning God made heaven and earth, since it is not advisable to recklessly affirm anything about these points.

Chapter IV

11. The earth was, therefore, invisible and in disarray, and the darkness occupied the abyss and the Spirit of God was carried on the waters. The heretics who oppose the Old Testament often criticize this passage when they say: how did God in the beginning do heaven and earth, if the earth already existed? They do not understand that this was added, in order to explain in what state was the land named above when saying: God made heaven and earth. Thus, in the beginning God made heaven and earth, it must be understood that this earth made by God was invisible and reportable until by the same Lord it was divided, and removing it from the confusion constituted it in an orderly state of visible things . Or perhaps it is better understood saying that it is remembered again in this execution, the same matter of things that it previously designated with the name of heaven and earth, so that by saying in the beginning God made heaven and earth he understands that what he called heaven and earth was a certain material matter from which the world would be made, which consists, ordered the elements and received the form, of two great parts, namely, of heaven and earth; and so this intelligence of matter could be made known to any intelligence, however rude, by calling it an invisible and unformed earth or without order and beauty, and saying that the darkness was over the abyss, that is, over the immense depth, which It was once again named, because it could not be understood by any intelligence because of its very information.

12. And the darkness was over the abyss. Was the abyss placed below and the darkness above, as if there were already different places? Or would it be said, since it is still about the materiality of matter, which in Greek is called chaos, that the darkness was over the abyss since light existed? If it had existed, it would certainly be on top, because it is more eminent, and would illuminate all the things that are placed beneath it. Indeed, the one who carefully investigates what darkness is does not find more than a lack of light. Then he said the darkness was over the abyss as if it had been said there was no light over the abyss. Therefore, this matter, which by the subsequent work of God is already distinguished by the formation of things, was called an invisible and reportless earth and depth lacking in light, which was previously designated with the name of heaven and earth, as if it were, as has been said, the seed of heaven and earth. Or perhaps he wanted, when he said heaven and earth, to give us first to know the universality of things, and then to insinuate the matter, to announce to us the work of the formation of the beings of the world.

13. And the Spirit of God was carried on the waters. Up to the present Scripture had not said that God had made the water, and yet, in no way can we believe that the water was not made by God and that it did not exist before He made something ordered, because He is of who, by whom and in whom are all things, as the Apostle affirms6; Then God made the water, and to believe otherwise is a big mistake. Why was not it said that God had already made the water? Was it because he wanted to call water the same matter that he called the name of heaven and earth, and also that of invisible and unformed earth, and abyss? Why, then, could it not be called water, if it could be called earth, being that until then it was not water, different and formed, neither earth, nor anything else? Perhaps it was first called heaven and earth, then invisible and unformed earth, and, finally, with all property water; in such a way that in the first place the matter of that universal creation was designated, under the name of heaven and earth, because it was made out of nothing; and in second term with the name of disordered earth and abyss, to insinuate the informidad, because between all the elements the earth is the grossest and the least noble of all; and thirdly with the name of water, in order to indicate the subject to the action of the artificer, since water is more formable than the earth, and thus by the ease of being worked and by allowing itself to be transformed more easily, by in the hands of the artificer, it was more properly called water than land.

14. Air is certainly more subtle than water. Ether with foundation is believed or judged to be more subtle than air, but air or ether would be called more improperly matter, because it is judged that these elements are more endowed with the power of action, and land and water of passion; but if this is still a secret, I judge very clearly that the wind moves water and many other earthly things; but the wind is the movement of the air and like its own restlessness. But it being evident that the air moves the water, however, the cause by which it is moved to be wind is hidden; Who will doubt then that the water to be moved receives with more property the name of matter, than the air that moves? Being moved is the same as receiving an action, and moving is doing something; from this it follows that the things that the earth begets are irrigated with water, so that they can be born and reach their perfect development; in such a way that it almost seems that water is transformed into things that are born, for which reason water is more rightly called, since it implies being subject to the work of the architect (because of its adaptability and convertibility in the bodies that are born), that air, in which only mobility can be noticed, lacking other qualities for which it would more accurately represent matter. Then the complete meaning is: in the beginning God made heaven and earth, that is, matter, which could receive the perfect form of heaven and earth, whose material was invisible and disordered earth, that is, report and immense abyss without light. Being subject to the action of modeling and the work of the artificer, it was also called water, by its own obedience to the operant.

15. Giving all these meanings to matter, the end of it is implied in the first place, that is, what it was made for; in the second term the same information, and lately the servitude and submission to the architect. Thus, by indicating to us that the matter had been made, he first called it heaven and earth; then, invisible and reportless earth and darkness over the abyss, that is to say, lack of light, for which reason it was called invisible earth; and, finally, he calls it water, subject to the spirit and apt to receive the forms and figures determined and visible. For this reason the Spirit of God was carried on the water, so that we understand that the Spirit was the one who worked; and the waters, that is, the fabricable material, the place where it worked. When we say, then, that these three names, matter of the world, matter report, manufacturable matter, are denominations of a single thing, we imply that the first of them fits very well the sky and earth, the second the dark , confusion, depth, darkness; and to the third the one of adaptability on which the Spirit of the artificer was brought to work.

16. And the Spirit of God was carried on the water. It was not borne in the way water supports oil; or earth to water, that is, as if it held him. If we are to take from the visible things examples to understand this, we will say that the Spirit of God was thus borne, as this light of the sun or the light of the moon, which illuminates the earth, is borne by the terrestrial bodies, not being contained or enclosed in them, but if the sky contains it, it is borne by them; we must also avoid believing that the Spirit of God was carried over matter occupying places. He was carried by a certain active and operative power in order that whatever he had to endure was made and manufactured; in such a way that the will of the craftsman on the wood or on any other material destined to make something of it, is endured, or also as the members of the body bear the will that mobilizes them to act. This resemblance, nevertheless, being as it is of greater excellence than any body, hardly takes place and almost does not serve at all to clarify to us the excelentísimo power of the Spirit of God, to whose virtue the matter of the world is subject to act in her; but we do not find a clearer and more appropriate similarity to evidence the subject matter than these things, which can in any case be understood by men. Therefore, in these intellectual investigations, we must take into account that precept of Scripture: those who bless God exalt him as much as you can, because he is still higher. This was written so that we understand in this passage by the Spirit of God the Holy Spirit, whom we worship in the ineffable and immutable Trinity.

17. Spirit of God can also be understood in another sense; judging him as a vital creature, in which this visible world with all its bodies was contained and moved, to which Almighty God granted a certain power that would serve him to work in those things that were produced. This spirit with property would be called Spirit of God, being as it is more excellent than any ethereal body, since every invisible creature surpasses all that is corporal and visible. Are not things created by God from God? Certainly so, for when speaking of the earth it was said: God is the earth and all the things that it contains8; and speaking of the universal set of beings, it is said: O Lord, you love souls, you are all things! 9 Then the word spirit can be understood in this way that I said, if we believe that what was said in the God made heaven and earth principle, only refers to the visible or material creature; and so, then, it was carried on the matter of visible things, at the beginning of its creation, the invisible spirit, which was also a creature, that is, it was not God, but nature made and formed by God. But if we believe that the matter announced under that word of "water" includes the universal creation, namely, the intellectual, animal and bodily creature, in no way can Spirit of God be understood in this place, but by that Immutable Spirit and Holy that was carried on the matter of all things, which God made and perfected.

18. A third opinion can be originated from this word spirit: to judge that under the name of spirit the air element is expressed, so that the four elements of which this visible world is composed, namely, heaven, earth, will be named here water and air; not because they existed apart and ordered, but because in the confusion still report of that matter, were, however, predetermined to be created from it, whose confusion and information was given the name of abyss and darkness. But whatever is true of these sentences, it must be believed that God is the author and creator of all the things that have appeared, both visible and invisible, not in terms of the vices they may have against nature, but insofar as it belongs to the same natures, for there is absolutely no creature that has not received from God the principle of being and the perfection of its own kind and substance.
